# SPARCED Jupyter Notebooks


	createModel/createModel_o4a: The purpose of each of these notebooks is to create a model that can be used in dynamic simulations. Initially, it generates a text file containing a text-based description of the model in the Antimony model definition language by processing the input files (tab-delimited text files provided in the “input_files” folder that describe various model components). The Antimony text file provides a human-readable description of the model elements such as species, rate laws, parameters and corresponding values. Once the Antimony text file is generated, it can be converted to an SBML file using the libAntimony library. The resulting SBML file is then compiled into an executable model by using the AMICI library which is saved in a local directory. In the current release, we present a reformulation of the SPARCED hybrid model alongside the original. In the newer version, the gene expression module and the protein biochemistry module (signaling) from the original hybrid model have been combined into a single SBML structure, which can be simulated deterministically using the AMICI solver. Even though it is not currently possible to perform stochastic simulation using the integrated-SBML model, it drastically improves the computation speed for deterministic operations. The two instances of the model creation notebook refer to each model version, namely, createModel for the hybrid model and createModel_o4a for the integrated-SBML model.  For every unique combination of species, rate laws and parameters, this step must be run at least once before the model can be used for simulations.  

	runModel: This notebook provides an example of simulation using the original SPARCED hybrid model. The workflow within this notebook includes importing the compiled model and hybrid simulation module, specification of the experimental conditions and simulation parameters and execution of a dynamic simulation. The user may specify the input parameters for the simulation, including a flag (flagD) to toggle stochastic (0) or deterministic (1) mode, total simulation time in hours (th) and ligand concentrations in nM. 

	testModel: This notebook demonstrates a comparison of deterministic simulation results between the original hybrid model and the integrated-SBML model. Compiled model and simulation modules are imported and simulation input parameters are specified in the same manner as the runModel notebook. In this example, a set of ligand concentrations adequate to initiate cell cycle under deterministic operation has been used. Once simulation is performed using both models, a time-course plot of active CyclinB-CDK1 complex from the simulation outputs shows the concurrence of cell cycle in both simulations. Furthermore, area-under-curve plot for the dynamics of all model species demonstrates the accuracy with which the integrated-SBML model recapitulates the outcome from hybrid-deterministic model. 